This paper concerns a controversy wherein the Royall Society may to some seem concerned; but indeed is not so. It is concerning a Book lately published at Padua by Mister James Gregory now a Member of this Society, entituled. This Book soon after it came over into England, was by another Member of this Society sent to me, desiring (in general terms) my opinion of it. And after a slight perusal of ye whole, to see what matter it contained, and examining ye Demonstration of the most leading propositions, the account I gave him in a familiar letter (of which I kept no copy) was, as I remember, to this purpose; that it seemed to me to contain divers things (so far as I could judge upon a slight perusal) ingeniously demonstrated though obscurely; amongst which was a new method of approximation for ye squaring of ye Circle, which was also equally applicable to ye Ellipps and Hyperbola. And more than to this purpose I do not remember that I did write. Nor do I yet see reason to retract what was then sayd in favour of it. It seemes your Lordships opinion was allso asked; which what it was your Lordship doth best know. And so of some others. Out of all which the Publisher of ye Philosophicall Transactions collected that character thereof which is inserted in those of
March last; in such words as he thought fittest to expresse what he did apprehend to be their concurrent sense. Nor do I see any necessity of receding from it save yt where he speakes of the Termination of converging Series, in stead of ye Termination, by a mistake it is sayd the Summe. Nor is the Royal Assembly (that I know of) further concerned in it.
Soon after; those in France, published an opinion of Monsieur Huygens, to whom, it seems, it had been referred to consider &amp; deliver an opinion of it. Hee there takes notice yt those of England had in ye generall given it a favourable character, (to which he addeth a like of his own;) but that they had sayd nothing as to that particular whether it were therein demonstrated that it is impossible Analytically to square ye Circle and Hyperbola (that is, by Addition, Subduction, Multiplication, Division, &amp; Extraction of Roots, which he calls Analytical operations). And delivers his opinion in the negative; and that supposing all to bee true which is demonstrated in his 11th proposition (where that demonstration is supposed to ly) it proves no more but that it cannot be performed by his methode; not that it cannot be done at all: unless it be supposed that the termination of a converging series can be no other way formed but by his methode; or at lest

In answere of the last your lordship did me the honour to write unto me, I have onely to say, that indeed we are about to sell Chasteauregnard, if it bee possible to gett som reasonable summe of monie for it, and so M. Tassin and others have had ordre to doe, as they did, their uttermost endeavours to helpe us to a good bargaine. But the French chicane is so subtle and the precautions of that nation so infinite - as in truth they have some reason to find scruples both in the Prince his minoritie and the substitutions of his grandfather - that till this day we could make no end with them. By one of the next ordinaries we are to heare, how they will accept of our solutions upon divers difficulties mooved by their Counsell. For my part, I see no great appearance for any conclusion. Neither in the meanetime, Mylord, can I see, why tenants should excuse their paying of what they owe upon the incertaintie of our bargaine, which is nothing to them, and if it please your lordship, I make no question but you will put them to it by very easie meanes of justice. For the saisies of creditors, it is another consideration, and we are labouring to see how to satisfye them, one of the debts being but a triffle and the other so old, that there is scarce any notice of the grounds of it amongst us. The desastre of the fire is a verie sensible one in these conjunctures. We expect particular relation of it, and I the occasions, where I may have the happinesse to shew, I am...

Sir, I finde myself greatly obliged to mr. Turner, first by the many offices of a true frende which hee hath rendred unto mee, and againe for that hee hath beene pleasd to make known unto you the most sincere affection which I have not only for the libertie of the prince elector, but also for the restitution of his electorall Highness and of his whole house in all that belongs to it. I have not faild to confer of this business with my lord of Leicester and to write into Sweden all that passeth heere upon this subiect and all that is to bee considerd therupon, not doubting but that the Queene of Sweden as most affectionate to this electorall house will send mee such orders as I desire for to bee able to act with so much the more authoritie.
Already I know that the queene of Sweden did much desire that his electorall Highnes as the first of the secular princes of Germanie, should have had the command of this armie which was vowed to the good and service of Germanie and that her of Sweden hath beene little satisfied in that the treatie between France and the directors hath passd without any the participation of her resident in those quarters.
You have obligd mee many wayes, but of all your kindnesses there is not any which I esteeme more then the good testimonies you render mee so liberally towards my lord-archbishop whose most humble servant and admirer I shall all of my live long bee.
I will labour by deeds rather than by words to mainteine the good reports you
have given of mee. I will not enlarge myself any farther, seeing that mr. Turner, with whom I communicate in all manner of freedome, will tell you very well and faithfully all that I can write. It remaineth onely that I pray god etc. to pray to god that it will please him to keep in his fatherly and most favourable protection you with your lady and whole house, in praying for which I beleive I doe a good service to his of Great Britanie and remaine
Your most humble and most obedient servant

I was never of the opinion of the ancient Roman poet, maintaining that no woman was ever borne speechlesse, but why Utricia Ogle should bee it towards Constantin Huijgens, I could not imagine till now, that your ladyship hath beene pleased to awake and to give me some reason, why she hath slept so long. Neither will I bee too inquisitive about the validitie of that reason, your onely will and pleasure having allwayes beene the rule of mine, and no satisfaction pretended beyond your owne, which I hope, Madam, you are to find most absolute and compleat in the jorney you are proposing to the baths, and that there you will wash of so well all your infirmities that wee may see your ladyship returne, provided of a paire of fatt and plumpe, and such as I suppose they were a dozen yeares since. In such a case wee will all long to see them at the Haghe, though I make no account that you should bee intended to trimme them up as the dutchesse of Lorraine told me, your noble cousine of Newcastle doth use to doe by binding a gentle
peece of ribon at the topp of every one, and so appearing. I am fallen upon this lady by the late lecture of her wonderfull booke, whose extravagant atomes kept me from sleeping a great part of last night in this my little solitude, where, since your ladyship hath seene it, I have built two lovely glasswindowed cabinets at the waterside, making now more use of them then of the whole castle of Hofwijck, which by this meanes is growen to a mighty and stately building, as everything in this world is great or small onely by comparison. I dare not invite your ladyship to the view of these wonders, but after your bathing, when I hope you will stand to your word and come to informe us, what may bee the reason of your famous Sibyllas remooving, and which way she may bee gone, this being a most strange kind of newes to us, as never having heard of it before. Certainly the towne of Utrecht is a mightie looser by it, and should have hindred it by all possible violent civilities, so that the ashes of that Phenix had beene preserved, where she hath so gloriously spent the best part of her life. If it were not too much trouble to your ladyship, I could wish to heare in general, what may have occasioned so suddaine a resolution. And thus praying God allmightye, to blesse that of your ladyship with a most prosperous successe, I remaine as ever and for ever...
Many a new almande, courante, sarabande and such like are to wayte upon your ladyship's comming, after I shall have mustered them before little, who, I hope, will see us before winter, having some occasion of his trade to deale with her, when she will be here from Turnhout againe.

The cause I am to trouble you withall at this present is so full of justice on my side, that first I dare dispute it even before you, the next interessed in it of all men, and secondly doe presume to give over the advantage of better knowne and accustomed language, to free you of the paine of interpreting what shall be said to My Lady Killigrew, against whome by her owne will and, God knoweth, much against mine, I am to undertake indirectly this tedious quarrel, my custome being not to enter in contestations with ladies, as indeed I would have beene loth to stirr, even in reflexion, in this particular, were it not that, finding my honour so farr attained by it, I could not for shame neglect to disgage it.
The ground of all may be laid open by a plaine recital of your sonn Charles his life, carriage and ending in these countries. It was, as you may remember, about my returning home from the last journey I made in England, that you thought fitt to send him page to the late Prince of Orange, desiring me, when I should come to the Haghe againe, to have an eye upon him and
direct his youth the best I could. A thing that I was not more bound and willing to promise, then actually readie to performe. How I performed it, as it is not convenient to be told by myself, so I dare call to witnesse for it not onely the courts of both Princes - nay this living Prince himselfe - but even the cheef and principal English gentlemen, that lived here all the while. The same courts and gentlemen shall testifie, how little I gained upon the poore youth, nay how, notwithstanding chiding, prayer, admonitions, inviting and entertaining of him at my mother's house and mine afterwards, from the very beginning to the ende of his service, it was not possible to divert him from the vilest and most infame company the Haghe afoards, as players, lackays and the like, with whom he rann headlong after all kinds of debauching. Even so farr, that for the conclusion of all, finding himself desperatly engaged in many debtes, and ayming at a full libertie of life, without the bonds of obedience, he left Prince, court and frends, without ever giving me so much as a pretexed reason of so shamefull a retreat, notwithstanding I did earnestly urge upon it, seeing him inclined to such a resolution, from which the truth is, I did endeavour to pull him of by all kind of frendly and sometimes threatning exhortations. Since, as I conceave, his businesse for debts going worse and worse, the next expedient was to turne souldiour. So with the English troopes he goes into Denmarck, suffered, as may be thought, want and misery, and finaly turned home into England, where, having need, accused not, as the lost sonne, himself, but - which is the maine knott of all the business - others, and 
such others as least deserved it, to justifie his owne faults before his parents. He came again to us, at the siege of Bolduque, reconciled, as I saw, to his father and with new adresses from yourselfe to be receaved gentleman of the Prince his chamber. By the answeres of Ed. Harwood and mine you saw then, how the Prince agreed it conditionally, so that, having first trained a pike under Edward's company for some moneths, he should by degrees be brought to the court againe, where, for consequence sake, he mought not be receaved so suddenly. The resolution taken, he getteth leave to goe for some businesse, as he told us, unto the Haghe, growes sick in the way at Rotterdam and suddenly dieth.
After all this, as I wondered, why Myladie your wife would leave divers of my letters touching this and other matters unanswered, or else, how so many could miscarrye, Ed. Harwood did me the favour to put me out of that incertaintie with the last of all, which being directed by him shurelie, at length I gott upon it a kind of answere, of which - to be the shorter - I will deliver you here a copie.
Sir, I can not but wonder that you sholde think it strange, what shadow[y] reason Myladie Killigrew had to deale with me in this fashion; I refer it to your owne consideration and to the truth of things, before recited. Onely intreating you to beleeve, that, whereas by many a witnesse and in Christian conscience I doe know myself free from doing otherwise with your sonne,
then I would others did to me and mine, it greeveth me exceedingly to see my sincere will and affection payed with a rash and precipitated opinion of the vilest of all vices, unthankfullnesse, which, for all that I think, nor your contriemen, nor mine did ever taxe me but injustly. My calling, Sir, giveth me occasion to doe good to many, my inclination to more, and this is the reputation I dare bragg of before the world. Were it not so, could I have been so beastly, as to neglect both my promise and the many reasons I had in your house to thinke myself bound to the good and service of you and yours? It greeveth me, I say, to the sowle, and this is all. To Myladie your wife, who for a conclusion doth wish me all misery, I wish from God allmightie all good and happiness, desiring this onely favour at her hands, that, when at one time or other passion - which indeed in the fresh wounds of a mothers heart is to be excused - shall have made some roome for reason in her mind, she will be pleased to consider, that, as for the maine fault she maketh me guiltie of, for leaving her sonn a dying without assistance or consolation, the same thing could have happened to my wife or brother, while full of perpetuall businessse, and yet ignorant of what might happen to your sonn, I lay in the fields, some fortie miles from Rotterdam, banished from my owne howse and children the space of a full half yeare. Wither now falling sicke at Rotterdam, he lacked meanes or mony, I can not tell. Ed. Harwood at that time had taken him, as I told before, into his speciall care, and I am sure would not see him wante, no more than I, of what he might have need of for his pretended journey to the Haghe. Besides that, for my part, seeing him in better order and apparell, then he was wont to bee, I did not doubt but that, upon the reconciliation with his parents, he came well provided from them of necessarie meanes, so that then, I must confess, I offered him no 
monie, nor was asked any of him, as more then once heretofore I was accommodating him with what I shall know never, nor I was resolved to make mention of, knowing how much I owe you beyond it, and therefore craving pardon for having beene provoked to touch it here by the way. As for the stalmaster your ladie thinkes I durst not displease, seeing rather her sonn miscary, besides that I should little feare to displease him for a lighter cause, if he went out of reason, the letter he writes may speak for him and free him of the reproch, I never saw layd upon his good name, the truth being in this particular - and he is ready to sweare it solemnely - that he did never use whipping against your sonne, but once, where, God knoweth - and I am loth to speake it of a dead man - he deserved it dayly, when indeed both he and I did pitty his youth, as we ought to doe, the one for remembring of his parents love and affection, the other for hoping to deserve it, as then your coming over ambassador was held out of question, and so little likelyhood, that either the stalmaster would willingly displease you, or I feare to displease him, upon the certain loss of your friendshipp. Thus farr, Sir, innocence forced me to stammer out my just and necessarie defense, by which having once decharged myself, I reste with the verie same affection to love and serve yourselfe, Myladie your wife and whosoever shall claime the same right in the name of both, so that, if my ungracefull words are unable to breed a new
impression of me in your minds, by a better argument and demonstration of a true and well meaning inclination to your service, I hope at last to shewe you, that without reason I have been thought unworthy the title of .... 30 March 1630.

Our honest citizen, according to your orthographie - having desired me to peruse what he hath set down of his observations about the sting of a bee, at the requisition of, and by order, as I suppose, of your noble Royal Society, I could not forbear by this occasion to give you this character of the man, that he is a person unlearned both in sciences and languages, but of his own nature exceedingly curious and industrious, as you shall perceive not onely by what he giveth you about the bee, but also by his cleere observations about the wonderfull and transparent appearing in all kind of wood, though most evidently and crystallike in the ordinary white and light wood used for boxes. His way for this is to make a very small incision in the edge of a box and then tearing of it a little slice or film, as I think you call it, the thinner the better, and getting it upon the needle of his little microscope - a of his owne contriving and workmanship - he is able to distinguish those so perfectly, that by these meanes he lighted upon the consideration of those you see him reasoning upon, and which indeed do discover 
themself in a perpetual and very pleasant series, so that, for my part, looking upon this fine fagot of crystal pipes, which in this particular is a fitter way then that of objects laying under a standing microscope, I am easily persuaded of what he discourseth further touching the easy rising of the sap by those short degrees to the highth of a tree, which otherwise could hardly
be forced up but by a scarce imaginable power. I make no question, Sir, but that since the first publishing of your excellent Physiological micrographie, you have stored up a great many of new observations, and that this also may be one of them, but howsoever I trust you will not be unpleased with the confirmations of so diligent a searcher as this man is, though allways modestly submitting his experiences and conceits about them to the censure and correction of the learned, amongst whom he hath reason enough to esteem yourself beyond all in this kind of philosophie, and many other besides. So that now he doth expect your instruction upon the difficultie he doth find in his glas pipes, whereout I am sure you are to extricate him by very good and ready solutions. If you will have the goodnes to let me see what important observations you may have gathered since the said edition of your book, as allso in any other curiosities, as I know your noble witt and industrie can never, I will take it for a special favour. My French sons new I beleeve by this time hath been seen amongst you. For as much I may claime to be the grandfather of that childs child, I doe long to heare the Royal Societys good opinion of it, and specialy the judgment of your most learned and worthie president, the lord Brouncker, and the illustrious Mr. Boyle, whose wunderfull capacity and universal knowledge I doe still admire and little less then before. Pray, let them both find here the assurance of my most humble and devoted affection to their service. I hope our sad and unChristian distractions will not make them nor yourself loath to heare from

I have received your second letter by Mr. Dewerts, wherin I find your dissatisfaction of the opinion of those little glasses. Truly arts are as obscure and hard to finde out by those that are unlerned in them, as natures workes; but to cleer my opinion, or rather to answer yours desires, I shall argue something more of them, though my arguments may be as weake as my opinions, and my opinions as weake as my judgement, and my judgement as weake as want of knowlledge can make it. - As for your liquor, you say in your letter, that if it were a sulphurous liquor, or a liquid gunpowder - as I said - I thought it might bee, doubtlesse it would be active by the help of fire; I answer for that, fire hath severall active effects both in ittselfe and uppon other substances, or subjects, wherfore, if the liquor had be[e]n dry powder, it might be subject to that effect of fire, as to flash, flame, or bounce, but if the powder were wett, the fire could worke noe such effects; but as the substance is a liquor, fire is as subject to that substance or matter, as that substance or matter is to fire, for all liquors, although strong with spirritts and hott in operation, will quench fire as sudenly, as fire shall evapporate liquor; take quantity for quantity, and it is probable, that the high fire, you did applye to the glasse, did eveporat out the liquor in the glasse, which might be the weakening and changing or altering the former effects. Alsoe you say, you cannot perceive the buble to be a licquor. I answer, that it is probable, the licquor, if any be therin, was evaporated out either by the fire, you applyed, or by the vent of passage, which may soone turn itt into vapor, by reason of the little quantity that is in a glasse; thus it might be wasted before the truth could possible be found out; for certainly to my sense, as alsoe to my reason, a liquor apeared to be in those glasses, you sent me; but if there be noe licquor in
those glasses,
then it is probable, it might be pent up ayre enclosed therin, which having vent was the cause of the sound or report, which those glasses gave. - Thus, Sir, you may perceive by my argueings, I strive to make my former opinion or sense good, allthough I doe not binde myselfe to opinions, but truth; and the truth is, that, though I cannot finde out the truth of the glasses, yet in truth I am...
Sir, I would have writt my leters to you in my own hand, but be reson my handwritten is not legabell, I think you might rather have gest up at what I would say, then had read what I had writt; thise is the reson, they wer writt by another hand.

let me but have the happines to know if your lute be still in order and in exercise; that will be the surest and to me the most welcome demonstration of your wel being.
I take the boldness to present your ladyship with a couple of my yongest productions, to shew you I am still sick of my mad musical humour, and am not like to be cured of it but with my last breath.

This is my second journey from the court of France into this within the space of but one yeare; I may better call it my second misfortune, seeing my occupations here will not give we leasure to goe and tender my humble respects unto your Ex.ce, which mortification lyeth so much heavyer upon me, Madam, because from beyond sea I am informed of your most undeserved goodness toward me, and that our good frends at Antwerp have enriched my library in my absence by ordre of your Ex.ce with a new plentifull store of your marvellous productions. I hope, Madam, you will not stand upon a rigorous
accompt with a man whom necessitie maketh uncivill. Being now almost dispatched by his Majesty I am instantly tossed over again to the King of France, about whom having spent the time of above two year already and being almost grown a stranger to my own country, I dare assure your that besides this reason the fine things I am to find at home by your favour will spurr my diligence in such a manner that, as we say in a Dutch proverb, the court of France shall see me make short miles with her, and your, I hope, receave in brief my more particular acknowledgment for the noble benefit she hath been pleased to bestow upon me.

